So first thing is HATEOAS.
You've probably seen this term,
heard this term, it stands for
Hypermedia As The Engine
Of Application State.
Meaning the state of your HTML is the
state of your program and that is how we
drive the changes, further on down
the line is what is currently there.
In the modern world, we don't do that.
What we do in the modern world is that
we have the virtual DOM usually contains
the state of your program.
Then you have a secondary state,
which is all the closures and
things within your JavaScript,
the use states,
all the little bits that are going
to update that virtual DOM.
That's your second layer of state.
Then typically if you're more enterprise,
you'll have a third layer state
which is your Redux state.
Which is controlling your routes, it could
be controlling how you're getting data,
async reducers,
selectors all that fun stuff to just
simply drive the engine of state.
And so, in the HTMX world,
we try to make it simple.
The hypermedia, the HTML,
that's the engine of application state,
not all the other things,
all the other layers.
It's your server is the truth, your
client is the reflection of the truth,
and there's little in between.
Now you can go as much as you want.
I've seen projects where they use HTMX for
all the chrome and all the stuff around
the application, and they use React inside
of it to drive all the user interactions.
Totally reasonable, you can emit events
from within a React application and
have HTMX actually run on the outside and
do all the updating and
executing on the outside, so totally okay.
Does that mean HTML is finally
a programming language?
Yes, does that mean you're
finally an HTML engineer?
Absolutely, what a great day to be alive,
finally.
Also, this is a 2011 nice little document,
which you should read.
This is by the current
community manager of Rust, and
he has a whole talk about how to do
HATEOAS and all this stuff, even in 2011.
So this is a fairly, again, this concept
has been around for quite some time,
this is not something new.
It just feels new because some unhinged
Montana man has now made it popular.
And that by the way,
I'm not the unhinged Montana man.
All right, so let's do this.
Hopefully I have the exact link,
yes, I do.
Fantastic.
So typically this is kind of like
your standard server interaction,
I do a GET at the root and
the server responds with some HTML,
that has links off to JavaScript, maybe
it's not a server that actually does it,
maybe it's like a CDN
in front of the server.
Whatever happens, something happens and
you get HTML back, right?
And so typically we're gonna be doing
something like this with a HTMX.
Any element may have some sort of hx-VERB.
That VERB will have a path,
we will make a VERB request to that path,
it will hit the server.
The server's expectation
is to respond with HTML.
The contents of the HTML will replace
the inner HTML of the element
that initiated the request and
that is only if it responds with the 200.
So if you respond with the 400 or
500 or whatever,
you now have to define some
sort of custom behavior.
HTMX just says no, we're not gonna
do anything in the 400 to 500s.
So, that means if we had
a div that posted to foo,
and it had the contents of
four green squares, and
the server responds with two blue squares,
the final state will
look something like this,
the div will now have two blue squares.
HTMX does emit a lot of events, so
you can hook in with JavaScript if
you want to add custom behavior.
It can react on a lot of different things,
including custom events.
It has ways to reduce
HTML from the request, so
you don't actually get the entire request,
you can just select out parts you want and
it also has ways to redirect to the HTML
to other parts of your application.
So this is all a part of it and
you can even redirect from the server or
you can redirect from the client.
You can make the choice yourself
depending on where and how you do it.
All right, so pretty fantastic.
Hopefully everyone's like that's it,
I just taught you pretty
much all of HTMX right now.
So we're gonna kind of go through some
exercises and put this into practice.
I just really want you to
see this image right here.
This is, I think,
is the best image to understand HTMX.
Starts with some green squares
inside of it, you make a request,
server responds with blue squares, now you
have blue squares inside of that same div.
The div was not removed,
the insides were removed.
All right, so that probably
explains what happened here, right?
I think we can start guessing as to why
our button has a button inside of it.